I remember like the stress levels with
working our ass off for 3 years on the
startup which failed. Having this little
money to try to make the dream come
true. I had a real breakdown. 10 years
go by and you look back and you go, "Oh,
wow, I remember we were making half a
million a year, now we're making a
billion." There is no shortcut and I've
seen nobody try cuz they just understand
it's just too painful.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Luca, this is going to be very fun. We
first met a couple years ago and I've
followed the Bending Spoons story ever
since with great interest. For those
that don't know about it since we're in
Milan today, uh it's not, you know, in
New York City, not everyone yet knows
about Bending Spoons, soon they will.
Can you just tell us what it is uh and
then we'll go from there?
Right. Um we are a pretty unusual beast.
Um yeah, unique almost I think as far as
I can tell. Um
I think a good representation would be
25% private equity, 75% tech company.
Meaning we acquire companies as a key
engine of growth.
100% acquisitions, no minorities like uh
And then
unlike a private equity which would
typically look to to sell them 3 5 7
years down the line, we buy off our
balance sheet to own and operate
forever.
And unlike a private equity which
typically would uh
make relatively shallow interventions,
maybe change the management team,
rethink
the entire company
uh try to come up with a vision for the
most successful version of that company
and and then work as hard as we can to
close the gap between the status quo and
that vision.
And it could be rewrite the software,
re-architect the cloud infrastructure,
launch lots of features, redesign the
UI, optimize monetization and marketing,
rebuild big chunks, sometimes the
entirety of the organization. So, it's
very extensive, deep,
time-consuming work,
sometimes radical work. And if we do it
right, that creates a lot of value we
can reinvest in making our call it our
our platform more powerful, also build
better proprietary technologies, better
access to talent, more knowledge,
and go after, you know, new bigger
acquisitions. Can you say a little bit
about the vision you have for the
business, not in terms of how big it
will be or the number of acquisitions or
anything, but 5 years hence, I know you
care very deeply about the culture of
the people here and kind of what the the
home office looks like and feels like.
What did you have a huge ambition for
what you're building? Maybe describe
that ambition and that vision a little
bit.
>> We felt inspired
at the prospect of building
like the the company being our product.
Building an institution, you know,
Berkshire Hathaway, that sort of company
that people look at and think was a a
defining
um company of its generation.
And so to do that scale is important. It
I think it's unlikely that you can be in
that conversation unless the company is
large and dominant, but also there needs
to be some
um level of excellence along certain
dimensions where the company is really
really stands out uh vis-a-vis the
others. And for us, it's always been
besides being absolutely exceptional at
the functional things like being
incredible at running these businesses,
one part that we we really want to be
awesome at is spotting some of the best
inexperienced talent in the world and
being the ideal place for that talent to
just skyrocket toward the maximum
realization of of of their potential as
quickly as possible. So, we we want to
be the ultimate testing and training
ground for incredibly talented and
motivated people. And so, the company 5
or 10 years out, I think we'll still be
a conglomerate of very interesting
digital technology businesses, hopefully
much more and generally the company
would be bigger. And I hope we can be
much much stronger at everything we do
and have even higher levels of talent
density and hopefully inspire
others to to try to raise the bar in how
they run their businesses. And by the
way, we started in Europe. We like the
idea that Europe should have It's It's
fascinating that if you think about most
of the very large super successful
companies globally, you you think about
almost entirely US or Chinese companies.
Historically US, now China's more.
Europe has very little to offer in that
regard, but it's 700 million person
continent, very good education. Um
I'm not saying we we, you know, we we
should have 10 trillion dollar
companies, but we don't have a single
one pretty much, I think last time I
checked. And so,
uh you know, we hope we can be part of
that movement showing that you can
actually build such a company from I
mean, we're an international company
with operations in the US, too, but
we're like the deeper roots, the
original roots can be here, too. We are
not a periphery of the empire.
>> It was actually Daniel Ek at Spotify who
introduced us originally and obviously
he's built one of the great, you know,
European origin businesses. Why do you
think there are not more of them? Like
you you obviously you're seeking to
change this, but but there's not that
many. What do you think the the deep
reasons are? I think the main reason is
uh a matter of uh default.
Why
does California have so much has had so
much success over the decades? One of
the reason is you have seen
incredible companies being created and
grown in California, you just assume
that's where you go and do it.
Especially as a founder, you don't know
much. Like you are ultimately
at least I was and think that's true of
many founders, you are a
passionate, determined, maybe talented
idiot essentially. And so, you don't
have you don't know the world enough to
to actually
determine what what the ideal location
will be. If you even think about it cuz
it typically how many times have you
heard of founders
doing a kind of a locational study,
where should I start my company? It
tends to be kind of
momentum like I happen to study here, I
know people are there, I should probably
just do it.
And so, a lot of talented Europeans,
many of the most talented Europeans who
have an entrepreneurial streak, I think
they just default to building in the US,
which is I mean, it's been fantastic for
for the US, of course, and
uh but but
there is a gap I think and
if we had more virtuous examples of
people who have built incredible
businesses again with a seed in Europe,
I think more people will will not would
not default
uh to that and think, "Oh, I actually
actually build such a business from
France or Portugal or Italy." Was that a
key part of the original vision that you
wanted it to be a beacon for European
talent and to show the world that a
company like this could exist here. And
if so, why? Why did you care so much?
Why not just go to California? I mean,
it's difficult when you talk about uh
what, you know, the sense of purpose,
what inspires you, I think it's we can
try to rationalize it, but there's
something
comes from the gut. We just felt that
there was a vision there that was worth
pursuing and that turned on our
our drive, our our passion and
ultimately we figured we love to build a
business cuz it's we love learning, we
love challenge, and I think the business
arena is is arguably the most
competitive field in which you can test
yourself of any field, even more than
sports, academia.
So, we liked it to start with. Whether
we fail in Italy, Denmark, Canada, the
US, nobody cares, but if we build
something remarkable from a country that
doesn't see as many successes, that
means something extra. It can be an
inspiration like I just said, it can
help local businesses aim a little bit
higher, raise their their, you know,
their their their standards. It can
create competencies locally that can
have a positive effect. And so, we just
chose
to do it that way. We don't regret it.
But yeah, there there were very good
arguments for us to maybe start in
California for sure. Like that was a
very reasonable point to make. You said
this this idea of test yourself. If you
think back on Bending Spoons history,
what was the first example of you really
testing your own limits? At the very
beginning, we actually had another
startup called Ever tale and that was a
failure. We learned a lot and actually
the strategy for Bending Spoons we came
up with it through the failure of Ever
tale. At the time with Ever tale, we
raised about a million euros all in all
and
VC money and ultimately the company was
about to go bankrupt. We had about
40,000 euros left. Um the that money
belonged to the VC because of
liquidation preferences, but it was too
little for the size of that fund
and they told us, "Look, it's just too
much hassle and legal cost for us to go
through this administrative process of
the liquidation. You guys worked were
honest, worked as hard as any anyone
could demand of you. You You keep the
money, we'll sell our shares to you for
a nominal 1 euro and, you know, go
you'll probably get something
after taxes from it and just go and get
a nice vacation." But we're you know,
we're seeking the brain and so rather
than going on vacation, we took whatever
we could and that was the seed capital
for Bending Spoons. This is 2013. And uh
and so, it wasn't a lot of money for
2,000 euro. We We lived all all of us
lived in the same apartment. Very low
burn rate, very low, as low as it gets
still. 40,000 euros, you don't do much.
Particularly as our vision was to
acquire a company. So, that's cap capex
intensive particularly at the beginning.
Well, you can't use that cuz you are
nobody and you don't have track record
or a cash flow. And so, we figured we
need a source of cash
to
uh kind of kickstart our acquisitive
strategy. We figured certainly the
easiest way is to just write software,
build products for for comp for third
parties.
Uh we are decent at programming and
design. Um
We should be able to do that. It seems
like an easy business to start, maybe
not to scale to gigantic uh level.
>> yeah.
And and so, especially what a co-founder
of mine and and I spent
a good 3 4 months like 12 16 hours a day
just emailing anyone, you know, anyone
on the planet and and cold calling
people, just trying, you know, we offer
discounts, we're like, "Just
hire us to do something." And I swear to
God we couldn't get anybody. I mean, not
a single soul hired us to do anything.
Only contract we got was
was for about 10,000 euros
uh from a essentially a friend of one of
my co-founders who I think took pity on
us and said, "Yeah, we need an app for
our small chain of burger places, you
know, we'll give you 10,000 euros to
build it." [snorts]
Um so, that was an utter failure. I
remember the stress levels with after
working our ass off for 3 years on the
startup which failed,
having this little money to try to make
the dream come true and uh and failing
miserably at this sales effort,
I had a real breakdown. I remember
I don't cry much. I cry maybe once a
decade.
I cried. I had a moment where I cried at
that point. I remember I left the
office. I just had to to cry cuz I was
like, goodness, it's been like 3 and a
half almost 4 years where we've been
working like 100 hours a week
and we have nothing to show for it. So
that was a massive challenge to to my
resilience and I owe it to one of my
co-founders who I think
is naturally more optimistic and has
better perseverance than I do.
And he kind of comforted me and we said,
okay, at least, you know, we're in this
together and just keep going. Yeah, so
we did and of course I'm happy with it,
but that was a pretty low point.
>> Didn't you have to get a job at McKinsey
at some point to fund a everybody else?
That was the the previous startup. Okay.
Yeah, that's a cool story. At least I
think it's cool. We basically we
graduate two friends of mine, Francisco
Mateo, who are happen to be co-founders
at Bending Spoons too, and
we have this idea of building
this Evertale company. The idea was to
to create a
a self-rising diary of a user's life
with AI. This is 2010, so AI was Nobody
was talking about AI in 2010. And
interestingly, we were very early on AI,
too early in fact because the product
just didn't work well because the the GM
app machine learning, at least not in a
way that you could scale for users. We
had no money whatsoever because all of
us essentially come from
pretty kind of low-class families,
whatever you want to call it. Like we
didn't have a lot of money.
And and as much as we you know, we we
didn't have an idea for a business that
would require billion dollars in capex
like a lot of startups today.
It we certainly needed some money at
least to eat and and and pay for rent.
And so we decided, okay, the three of us
were going to look for a job. Whoever
gets the most lucrative offer offer goes
to work and pays for rent for the other
two. Once we raise
seed capital VC money somehow, then this
person would resign and join full-time
and you know, and then we go and conquer
the world.
So we all look for a job and I I get an
offer from McKinsey.
By our standards at the time, very
lucrative and so I said, okay, this is
perfect. I'll be the one uh
paying for rent and food. I was
terrified that once I told So I I'm
capable
>> [snorts]
>> of not being transparent, let alone
lying. So I had to tell the partner at
McKinsey that I would be working on the
startup on the side. I thought it was
unwise in many ways cuz I was absolutely
certain they would withdraw the offer,
but I'm like, I just can't. Like I it
feels dishonest. And actually was
enthusiastic and he encouraged me and
said, absolutely, we'd love to have you
and you know, if if and when the startup
takes off, you know, I wish you the best
and and thank you. So um, I was very
grateful. I still have a very fond
memory of McKinsey for that reason like
a lot a lot of gratitude and uh
and I worked there for about a year,
then we managed to raise initially half
a million euros, then another half a
million later from a VC and
I completed my project and I resigned.
Willingness to do anything to get going.
I've never heard that before one person
funds the other two to be building and
then you join them on the weekends.
There was no contract, nothing. 100%
just trust which
I don't know. I just think it's it's
really a good way to live life.
Sometimes you get some some some sour
moments because of it, but
it makes 99% of it so much more
enjoyable if you don't have to be too
transactional. And so between Evertale
and Bending Spoons, what was the where
did the insight come from to be sort of
an M&A driven acquirer of businesses
rather than building them?
Evertale was your startup by the book
meaning this idea that probably won't
work, but if it works, could be huge and
very innovative. Like nobody had
attempted as far as we could tell
anything like that before. And so we
worked super hard on that project for
about 3 years. And and naturally as you
are
a startupper or when you do something, I
think you tend to network with people in
a similar situation
for a bunch of reasons. And so over time
we got to observe probably a couple
dozen teams go through similar journeys
as we did. And through that observation,
we saw that of course most failed which
you would expect and maybe three or four
had levels of success. And we saw
almost no correlation between
the teams we we considered more more
talented and more hard working and those
who came out on top.
And so we concluded probably, I mean,
it's not a huge sample, but probably
to go from zero to one,
luck plays a huge role. There are so
many factors and variables that you you
know, even if you're a genius and you
work your ass off, you're still likely
not to
you know, the stars will probably not
align for you
anyway. Whereas at the same time, we
also found that our skills at all the
functional things like software
engineering,
well, AI at the time for what it's
worth,
product design, product management,
marketing,
although they were still pretty
uh crude 3 years later, you know,
nice and day relative to when we
started. We had we were we were on a
clear path to
I'd like to think excellence. And so we
thought being really good at the
functional knowledge and skills
necessary to run a digital business
really well is probably a matter of if
you're assuming you're reasonably
talented, a matter of perseverance,
effort,
discipline. We we know we can bet on
that.
We don't want to bet our entrepreneurial
lives on getting lucky. Um,
so why don't we try to be excellent at
the functional things and then buy
businesses from people who
either, you know, maybe got lucky or
they actually they're very good, but
they
also the passions changed changed
between going from zero to one to one to
two to to 10. Like it's a different job
and so maybe they're very talented
people who have gotten far. They're just
a little bit fed up with it. They
they're it's not not interested in
running the next phase of it. Uh we
should be able to find situations where
it's a great deal for both parties
because of these factors. That turned
out to be true. And now in in hindsight,
all 12 years later, there is a lot more
to it. There are structural advantages
in integrating different businesses
under the same roof, but at the time we
didn't have that insight which today is
probably more important than what I just
described. Um, but what we had
identified was enough to
drive some level of success for the
first maybe five or six years.
>> I'm going to come back to the beginning
and the early acquisitions, but since
you mentioned it now, describe what
you've learned those advantages are that
exist, you know, in having I'll call it
a home office that sits on top of a lot
of different business units. I'll give
you an obvious one and two not so
obvious ones. The the obvious one is of
course you get to say you you can
negotiate with a vendor of cloud
infrastructure, advertising partner,
better better So that adds probably a
couple percentage points in your EBITDA
margins, so it's good. It's useful. It's
not transformative, but it's it's or you
can make an R&D investment in a
uh general purpose technology that many
businesses can then leverage and or
although that investment would be
prohibitively expensive, irrational to
make for any one of those businesses
individually, it's actually very
appealing if you can deploy it across.
The two more important ones are at least
equally important, but I think more
important ones are one,
we can move R&D and also marketing
resources fluidly across businesses. So
in my experience, the R&D opportunity
when you run a business is quite
fleeting.
It changes quite rapidly over time. So
you maybe you're new
in a certain field or that field evolves
and there is an opening to expand the
feature set, upgrade your technology. In
time, that's going to be table stakes.
There's a window when to do that
actually yields substantial returns.
But hiring people, coaching people,
training people, organizing people is
very slow. Unless you So you got really
have two choices. Either you do you make
it happen in a few months, but you're
going to do massive damage to your team,
your culture, talent that's going to be
low. If you're going to do it right,
it's going to take years.
At the same time, as you go after an R&D
opportunity, basically you build the
features.
Every business has a kind of a
saturation point where there's nothing
more, at least nothing more very
substantial to build. But then you are
stuck with a larger team and of course
it's costly, emotionally taxing for all
involved to shrink that team. It's
difficult. And so because of all these
factors, in my estimation, most
companies are years behind
in terms of the optimal staffing.
They're actually years behind what they
should be
could they control the people factor
perfectly instantaneously. Some
management teams are better than others,
but it's it's really just an inherent
inefficiency of a single product model.
But because we can pull at least part of
our R&D resources and we really work on
hiring people who are super flexible,
adaptable. We There's a whole bunch of
things you need to do for this to be
feasible in practice. We can move them
very quickly and attack these
opportunities and withdraw as the
opportunities are not there any longer.
This makes us super efficient both on
the offensive and on the defense.
Another major advantage of our model is
that take Evernote. It's a very nice
business, nice product, beloved product.
Most
people would consider the prospect of
working at Evernote just average
appealing. Like it's a nice product,
nice company, but it's also not my
I'm not as excited as I'm as as I would
be thinking about OpenAI or you know,
like the the next big thing. So on
average, a business like Evernote, no
matter how
charismatic, intelligent its leaders
are, will attract somewhat
average talent. There will be a Gaussian
function and some people better than
others, but Bending Spoons has a model
that's very appealing to people. First
of all, it's growing fast, so it feels
like you we're going places.
You have variety. So you know that you
can test your skills and and fine-tune
and expand your skill set across a
variety of challenges and businesses and
technologies. It's more and in a way
from the talent attraction perspective,
much better than an Evernote
stand-alone. And so all else being
equal, we can attract stronger talent.
Layer on top of that, the ability to
make massive investments in all the
processes, the knowledge, and the tools
required to attract and and predict
talent.
We have a a massive investment in AI
applied to predict future performance
based on CVs, cover letters, test
results. It's a very expensive
investment to make. It's difficult to
justify for a company that maybe only
hires 20 people a year, smaller. And we
can build on top of that inherent
advantage by doing even better on
Like we basically we have access to
better talent, plus we'll be better at
selecting within that talent pool than
most companies would. So,
that gives us a major talent edge
um that's just not attainable for
for companies that for
I'm sure again OpenAI
probably has access to many of the best
talents, but like 99% of companies
cannot say that.
And we're better off. This year alone,
this 2025, with almost at the end of the
year, we'll we'll be receiving
about 800,000 unique job applications.
We'll be hiring 250 people.
>> Wow. That's one in
3,000, 4,000. It's super selective. And
it's not because I'm smart or anything.
It's just
inherent advantages of of the Bendings
Rule model. And of course at the
employer brand built over a decade of
investment and Yeah. people work here
saying it's amazing, talent density is
great. So, you can't shortcut it. It
takes forever, but you couldn't as a
standalone company even if you had the
patience. I heard somewhere that for a
long time on Slack your label was
recruiter. Which [laughter] is kind of
which is pretty cool. I think it still
is. It still is. I think it's
recruiting. Is it still there?
Recruiting.
>> [laughter]
>> Um you mentioned the idea of building an
employer brand for a decade plus. Talk
about those two things, how they go hand
in hand, and and what you've done that's
been most successful at building the
employer brand.
By far talent density. We think about
the jobs we offer as our most important
product.
So, you need to know who your customer
is, what you're offering, how you're
differentiated. And that's the core
right of really focusing on that
sharply.
I find a lot of companies
are almost afraid of someone not liking
them, some team member
uh getting offended by some practices.
And they are I think they they are
unappealing in general because they're
too vanilla, too boring. Mm, they're
nothing in a way. They're everything and
nothing. And certainly they're not
appealing for the you know, the most
brilliant and driven people who want a
very clear
exciting opportunity. So, we have
focused pretty much from the beginning
of getting better over time at it on
being the ideal place for incredibly
talented and hungry, determined
uh professionals. Um
And and we try to we we make a promise
to them to surround them with incredibly
high talent density. And you know, I
just mentioned how selective we are
at the entry point. We continue to be
selective throughout. That certainly
brings to, you know, forces us to have
difficult conversations and there are
moments of stress, but overall it's a
clear net positive. And yes, it's a more
intense, challenging workplace, but for
people who want to be
the most, you know, the best version of
themselves professionally as quickly as
possible, it's almost a unique
opportunity. Um
So, that's our customer. That's the
person we want to surround ourselves
with. Why is testing yourself so
addictive? Like what what is it about it
as a function that you and the team so
enjoy?
It's difficult to tell. I suspect though
it's a common trait of a lot of people
who
have achieved greatness in their
vertical. I'm thinking
for some reason tennis comes to mind.
When I look at Novak Djokovic, Rafa
Nadal, I don't know them personally.
They both strike me as people who were
absolutely turned on by the idea of
testing their limits and pushing against
those limits. And And I don't think they
wanted to win for the sake of saying,
"Oh, I won 23 grand grand slam
tournaments." They love the idea that it
was supposed to be impossible. And you
know what? I'm going to I'm going to
prove prove it's not. It's one of the
ways some humans are wired. But the
truth is a lot of human I a good enough
number of humans is wired that way. And
those humans are are those who tend to
have breakthroughs, excel in their
fields, whether it's academia, sports,
or business. And so, if you want to if
you feel that way yourself, if you want
to win and excel in an area like we want
to do with our with our approach, that's
the kind of person I think you want to
surround yourself with.
>> Have you learned anything surprising
about yourself or about how the world
works
in all these years of testing yourself?
One thing I I've learned
um
that's cost me a lot of uh
sanity and and caused me some sleepless
nights is that consensus
is overrated and even dangerous, at
least when you're trying to achieve
something.
Are we clear? I I don't believe I don't
like the model of the you know, the
bright
brilliant or anything like that.
I think you can be
you can
not be a consensus seeker while being a
perfectly respectful, nice human being.
I would prefer I think, you know, that
that's a model I would espouse.
Um but in general, if you're striving to
stand out in your field,
if you're very concerned about aligning
everybody around that particular we
vision approach, not causing anybody to
dislike you, criticize you, I think
you're absolutely doomed to fail.
Unfortunately, I'm naturally wired to
enjoy consensus. I quite struggle with
the
with friction and criticism by nature.
And I think at least personally and
certainly my capacity to the company
that's that's slowed me down, caused me
some pain that in hindsight
was un- unwarranted and you know, didn't
bring any good to anybody. So, I was
feel felt pain and others benefited as a
consequence.
And and instead, when you have a clear
idea you believe that's the right
approach, and of course you have
listened to input with intellectual
honesty, openness, so it's not a matter
of pride, just a matter of intellectual
conviction,
then I think uh being able to just uh
accept
disagreement, pissing some people off,
and just going very, you know, straight
toward that goal
is a superpower. I At least it took not
perfect at that for sure, but I'm much
better today than I was when I started.
But at least the first seven or eight
year years I think I was absolutely
terrible at it. Thankfully, others on
the team were better. And so, as usual
in a team, you complement each other. I
think a lot of management teams are too
worried about
having a percentage, for example, of
their of their team disagreeing with
them, criticizing them. Instead, I think
they they should really try to if they
believe they have they've got a
solution, the path ahead, I think they
should be willing to
they should be uncompromising in that
regard. So, if we rewind time now to the
early days where you've got this core
insight that zero to one is really hard
and maybe somewhat random, you have this
skill set that probably is really viable
in one to end. And you're going to go
acquire businesses and apply the talent
and skill set to make the products way
better, bigger, faster, everything. What
is the first couple years of that
process like? Like how are you looking
for companies? How do you have enough
money? You I'm sure you must have
started small. What were some of the
first acquisitions? Like talk us through
the early lessons and early activity in
the M&A markets? Oh, yeah. I mean, in
the beginning again we had those 40,000
euros.
>> [laughter]
>> So, we were trying to to get, you know,
do some consulting like I said, which
never worked. I mean, basically brought
no revenue, pretty much. We The first
acquisition I think we closed it
within the year, so pretty quickly. And
we paid 10,000 for it.
And it was I don't remember what it was
called, but it was a an iOS app to
personalize your keyboard. Okay.
Ultimately made 20,000 off it, like a
very good return in a short period of
time, but at a tiny scale.
And then,
you know, that 20 went into
couple other acquisitions and maybe
turned into 40. But again, similar
nature, so small product
uh amateurishly built
uh certainly no, you know, uh
institu- institutional investors. No
investors of any sort. Definitely no
professional management teams. Typically
one person selling the
>> an app. Yeah, exactly. In parallel, we
also launched a handful of products from
scratch.
>> [snorts]
>> Again, to try to complement, learn
things, complement because if you don't
acquire almost anything cuz you've got
no money, you're also not learning. So,
we were trying to learn, hopefully make
some revenue. We had a couple of mild
successes, like enough that it extended
our runway. So, many small things like
that. And we kept adding and
compounding.
But slowly but steadily, 10 10 10k turns
into 20k and 40 and 80 and
we're being compounded at pretty fast
rates. I mean, if you look at our per
share revenue or EBITDA growth over the
past four years, where we are a decent
scale, I guess like it's about 1.3
billion this year,
it's still about 75% per year. We're
still compounding pretty fast. 10 years
go by and you look back and you know,
"Oh, wow, I remember we were making half
a million a year. Now we're making a
billion."
>> So, in those early days, what were the
key lessons that you were learning? Like
what did you start to realize were the
right attributes of an app, a piece of
software, a company that you might
acquire? What were the What were the
things that you were after? It's always
been the same things on a high level,
and that would be
number one, so far we've always focused
on digital technology. We haven't bought
supermarket chains, nor do we plan to.
Cuz you got to be I feel you want to
stay reasonably
within your circle of competence.
Ideally, here and there you want to take
a step kind of half outside of it. You
need to kind of keep pushing the
boundaries cuz that will keep your TAM
expanding as you expand within the TAM.
But but I don't think it it would be
wise, especially as long as the model is
works well, it's efficient to take
massive leaps outside of the circle of
competence just because. So,
digital technology, scale. Scale is
relative, but we because our approach is
so hands-on, so time-consuming, I
mentioned we can sometimes we radically
rethink a business or at least several
components of it. We will do maybe five
acquisitions a year. Could be one, could
be 10 max. I mean, if it's really a
stretch.
>> [snorts]
>> And each, some more than others, will
will really go super deep and rethink
the details. And the time investment and
the effort does not scale linearly with
revenue. So, for us to do an acquisition
that will bring in
half a billion in revenue is not five
times as time-consuming as one that will
bring 100 million. No, maybe it's on
average a little bit more time consuming
because it tends to be more complicated,
but nowhere near linearly. And so we
want to do fewer acquisitions, but
bigger.
So, first criterion is scale. And again,
at the time 10K looked like a big bet.
Although we feel like
today we're actually hoping to invest
easily a billion plus, but conceptually
[clears throat] the same thing. The
second thing is we need to be able to
predict the future performance of that
business, otherwise
there's no way we can make a confident
investment.
We've gotten very sophisticated in time
you know, statistical and lots of
assumptions and probability
distributions, but at the essence of it
we need to buy stuff where we know where
it's going. At least you know, with
sufficient confidence. And the last one
is we need to believe we can make
meaningful substantial improvements to
that business. Not that it's a
necessity, but it's difficult for us to
imagine being able to make an offer
that's super exciting for the seller
and then being okay, this is perfect
buy. You know, like uh probably they
wouldn't sell it to us for that price.
These are the criterion the criteria and
they have remained but the level of
sophistication our understanding of
these criteria
over time is
I mean it's it's incomparable. Maybe we
could talk about Evernote as a great
case study because it's a I used to use
it all the time. It was my like place of
record for keeping my notes and book
highlights and all these things and
people have heard of the brand and it
was a big acquisition for you. I'm
curious what you think of it as like the
milestone acquisitions in the history of
Bending Spoons, but I'd love to dive
[clears throat] into that one uh
especially just to hear an example of
like the whole story soup to nuts of how
you found it, what you saw, what you
did, how you thought about price, what
your team did, what's happened since.
I mentioned earlier at the beginning it
was all what you call we would call
asset deals, individual apps and whatnot
and the
um
and then we had a period of maybe three
four years where we saw that that very
basic small scale model work was going
to saturate at some point in the not so
distant future. We should do this at a
bigger scale with structure companies
with management teams and large
teams of professionals and
institutional investors. I think we
lacked confidence to take the leap
immediately and so we started losing a
bit of focus and
and looking at alternative
um strategies while taking tentative
baby steps into that next level of the
same thing really, but just Yeah.
I guess it's a bit like I played locally
now I want to do an international tennis
tournament to go back to the tennis
metaphor. You know, will I be able to
compete? And probably yes, if you're
doing super well locally. Yeah, of
course you will not be the best at that
yet, but but I I I think it's you can
empathize with there being a little bit
of hesitation and insecurity, right?
And I think Evernote was the first such
company like up clearly, you know,
within that definition. My guess is that
we paid like 50% more than the next best
offer. So, it was really a win-win,
which is the way I believe you should
try to any any good strategy needs to be
somewhat win-win, otherwise it will not
go far. We were invited to that process.
At the time it wasn't something we took
for granted because we were not so well
known. So, many times we missed out on
process the sales processes that
happened and
took a look look at it. I think we were
very fast in making a what turned out to
be the winning bid. And we just saw
a very good brand, although certainly
slightly tarnished, but still a quarter
of a billion people had used Evernote.
Strong brand
uh an important use case, a lot of
customers with thousands or tens of
thousands of notes using Evernote to run
their their lives really and the product
had not probably kept up with the times
as well as you you as a customer would
have love to love to see.
>> [snorts]
>> Uh and of course you can only realize
that fully once you're
uh on the inside and really open the
hood and but you can you get a sense of
that as a user and so we we bid, we won
it and then yeah, we began began our
usual transformation process
on a different scale, but essentially
had a team of some of our best experts,
functional experts, you know, growth,
product, design and engineering and
going with met everybody who spent a lot
of time with everybody on the team and
worked on projects and really got
acquainted with the nitty-gritty details
of of the business broadly speaking
and then started you know, developed a
roadmap for how to to make Evernote more
successful and
got to work and the
>> [clears throat]
>> it's it's a completely different
business today. I think in two and a
half years we have released
by now probably about 250 significant
product improvements. It's difficult to
be 100% quantitative about product
improvements cuz you know, there's no
perfect definition, but my in my
estimation we have been
improving and innovating
probably three to five times three to
five times faster than before. We've
been able to do to do this with a
smaller team
really working on keeping all the
positions that were critical, getting
rid of projects and initiatives that we
thought were tangential and really not
adding a lot of value, working on talent
density, the culture of impact
orientation rationality, really trying
to make sure that what we do moves the
needle and it's a lot it's a million
things that you you bring in as a
business with with our platform, but uh
we rebuilt almost entirely the the code
base, the cloud infrastructure. There's
almost nothing, at least nothing of the
core components. It's now far higher
performance. Notes sync up
in less than 10% of the time in some
cases
1% of the time. Hm. I remember that
being a problem when I was using it.
That's why I stopped. It is super fast.
Um you you would not tell the difference
at all compared to the products you you
probably consider the best in the
broader productivity. Like maybe you
think Notion is
top notch in the broader productivity.
I think you would try Evernote today you
would consider they do different things,
but the quality of the experience you
consider probably on par. Yeah.
Uh so [snorts] we had to close a big gap
there.
Um
retention is
at an all time high despite prices being
higher cuz now Evernote is substantially
more varies by country and but it's
probably average say 60% more expensive.
So, it's substantially more expensive
than before, but surely retention is
better cuz yeah, we did lose say 10% of
customers were
already not so sure and once the price
goes up, okay, I'm out of here. But all
the more engaged
um loyal customers they're still still
on board and uh
customer satisfaction by any
quantitative metric is
better than it's ever been before. So,
we but it was a very time consuming
effort, not something
I think completely beyond what to say a
private equity could do without having
its own
R&D team Yeah, and
and having to maybe be ready to sell
within a few years. And again, we can't
do it 100 companies each year, but we
can do three or five or six. How do you
know when there's pricing power? Like if
prices are 60% higher, you've made
you've made it a better product, so
maybe that's why the price can go
higher, but how do you think about price
charged to end users across your
universe of of applications that you
own? It really depends on on each case.
I'll give you another case that's quite
different from Evernote and that would
be Meetup. Meetup historically you could
only use it as an organizer. You could
only use it if you paid for it. We
introduced a free tier, so you could
organize quite we actually do quite a
lot for free.
Which which kind of qualifies as a price
decrease in a way. Like we uh we gave
away more for free. And we actually
increased the price for the more
advanced use cases for the truly kind of
dedicated
based on my observation there's room for
being more sophisticated about pricing.
Yeah. Which is different from increasing
prices. Being better at segmentation,
what's paid, what's given away for free,
personalization, communications,
experiences that ultimately all blend
into monetization and the maximization
of user LTV.
Are direct experiences that
there's a wide range of levels of
sophistication in the market. I I'd like
to think Bending Spoons being at the
very top of that sophistication
spectrum.
Whether that translates into higher
prices or lower prices or same prices,
I don't know, but it certainly
translates into a very different overall
approach to monetization. Just as a
quick aside, why is it called Bending
Spoons?
Uh
so when we started we we knew that we
want to we didn't we weren't going to be
a one product company. Mhm. We still
wanted the name to connect to something
for us. A lot of companies are named
after somehow have after the the problem
they're trying to solve their product
all of them, but or the problem they're
trying to or the product they're trying
to deliver. And so we we figured, okay,
why don't we look for a name that small
connects to some principles or values
that we find inspiring. Mhm. One of my
co-founders Matteo is a big fan of the
Matrix the movie. Yeah. I think he
watched the movie the night before, I'm
not sure, but anyway,
he told us, why don't we call why don't
we call it Bending Spoons?
Um
you know, I watched the movie and
there's this little bald guy who
uh
>> [snorts]
>> bends a spoon with his mind and I I
think it's cool. And and we initially
initially we didn't like it. I still
have a
uh spreadsheet with the different names
and Bending Spoons I think we give it
like four out of five stars. There were
a couple others that got more stars. The
one I remembered in hindsight I thank
God we didn't pick it Appeal because we
we were doing only apps initially. Now
we do all sorts of technology and
software, but and so you know, app
appeal Mhm. I think it's awful for some
reason, you know, the Luca from 2013
thought it was brilliant. So, it got
five stars out of five, but we picked
Bending Spoons and the reason why we
liked it was it connected to two
principles or values that we we they're
still very dear to us. One is call it
the power of the mind. The idea of
bending spoons somehow
at least to me inspires this vision of a
powerful mind that can do things that
appear impossible. And we're we're big
believers that the you know, the human
brain has incredible potential if you
work
on it and at it and try to really give
it the tools.
And the second reason why we loved it
was
uh that [snorts]
even if you have that brain, it again,
it just intuitively feels like to to get
to the point where you can bend spoons.
Um you have probably worked really hard
at your craft. And we like the idea of
almost anything in life that has value,
you got to work at it. I think it's true
with a family, romantic relationships,
your your craft as a professional,
your abilities as an athlete. I think
almost anything that's that will really
give you satisfaction requires work. And
so it And plus it was kind of a unique
name. We hadn't heard of any company
called the bending spoons and so we
figured it's probably memorable. Let's
go for it.
>> I love it. I love that and I love that
and I love that movie. So now knowing
the reference, it's great. Um going back
to the Evernote acquisition, you
mentioned you paid 50% more than maybe
the next highest bidder. How do you know
the right price to pay? Like how do you
think about pricing assets as you buy
bigger and bigger ones? We can talk
about Vimeo, we can talk about AOL. You
know, the these bites at the apple are
going to get bigger and bigger. Price
matters of course. You have the ability
to do a lot after buying it, so maybe
that allows you to pay a higher price,
but still I'm sure you want to pay a a
good fair responsible price. How do you
think about it? One is how do you
determine your
function returns as a function of price
paid.
The second one is
how do we
uh stay disciplined? So we will really
not pay more than we believe is right
based on our expected returns, you know,
opportunity cost. What else we could be
doing with that capital and at what
returns?
So the first one is a matter of
sophistication and the second one is a
matter of psychology really I think, you
know, discipline, patience. And the
third one is how well do we negotiate?
So how efficient are we at positioning
the ultimate price on that curve? Cuz
the the fastest but stupidest approach
would be to immediately offer the very
most you can pay, you know, and the
opposite of offering a ridiculous low
price is probably equally stupid. So you
want to find the right balance.
Interestingly actually
are much closer to the former. We
believe it's better to have a reputation
for someone who offers a very fair price
immediately, but who's not going to be
very willing to negotiate much. The
first one, like how do you determine
that
uh return as a function of price curve?
You got to be very sophisticated at
knowing what you're doing, uh having
first party data for benchmarking,
asking the right questions, having good
models. The output of the model is only
as good as the assumptions you put in it
assuming at least the the model is
mathematically sound. And we certainly
have very sophisticated cohort models
and whatnot, but the main competitive
advantage is in being able to run these
businesses a lot better. I mean it's
it's We don't win because we're good at
predictions. We win because we can run
them better, so we can offer a good
price. But it certainly helps. It's
really marginally important to
to making good predictions. And so you
want to 12 years of experience running
many businesses, running businesses from
the trenches in the details unlike
private equity, I think teaches you a
lot more. So you understand why things
went a certain way with certain
business. You're wiser when you set the
assumptions for your next acquisition in
a way that I think if you stay on the
financial layer or kind of or I talk to
management every week, you think you
understand, I don't think you really do.
There is a cost to pay.
It takes time. But then on the on the
bright side you you you can you're
basically smarter at then predicting the
future when you find yourself in a
similar situation again. So we
Assumptions setting is critical for us.
We have, you know, many assumptions each
has a probability distribution and we
debate assumptions extensively without
ever looking at what the model will spit
out as a consequence. That's forbidden.
Cuz we think that if you see the P&L
basically the
the business plan
as you do it, there are all sorts of
biases on doesn't look good enough and
you're like, "Oh, maybe this is
conservative. Let me push it."
We it we do not look at the output only
at the input. We debate, analyze, dig
for more data. Once we're happy that
that's the best we can do
at this stage, we run a Monte Carlo
simulation
and then we look at the distribution of
IRR, NPV and that's the truth. Nobody
can say, "Well, but you know, now that I
see it, I think maybe we were a bit
pessimistic with the assumptions." No,
too late. I mean this is now the truth.
This is what will guide our negotiation.
So that's phase one. And then you make
an offer. As I said, we try to make an
offer that's sometimes the maximum we're
willing to pay or close to it because we
think although we could probably get a
better deal in the moment if we started
lower,
then we don't want to establish a
reputation for people you can push
around and
and get more out of.
We're more like the Warren Buffett model
of I'll give you a what I think is
actually a very good offer.
>> [snorts]
>> Uh and you know, I'm okay if I hear no,
but don't think you can get 25% more out
of me just just asking. And then you got
to be disciplined when they ask for more
than you're willing to pay.
You absolutely need to not have fallen
in love with that particular business
and say, "Okay, you know what? It's not
to It's not to be. We'll move on to the
next."
>> What's your walkaway rate? Like for for
every AOL, Vimeo, Evernote that you buy,
how many did you want to buy that you
ultimately didn't? Oh, well, it's We
need to define this because we we look
at
actually thousands of businesses each
year.
Uh we don't make an offer to thousands
of businesses. I'd say we probably make
an offer to maybe yeah, maybe twice as
many as we buy. And you know what? We
have never lost a bid before. There has
never been a business we made an offer
for and someone else got it. Those we
didn't buy were ultimately the seller
just chose not to sell to anybody.
Um so that tells me our offers are
typically super competitive. Tells we're
probably not very good at negotiating.
Cuz I think a some level of failure rate
would indicate a more optimal strategy.
I guess you you you you you fail, you
learn, you get better.
>> Can we talk about the history of the
financing of the business because like
you said you've done very little direct
equity capital raising before. You've
done some debt. Has most of this just
been build up of free cash flow from
earlier businesses until you have enough
to buy the next thing and then just
rinse and repeat?
Yeah, in short
the the more sophisticated version is
completely true what you just said for
the first
5 years.
Then we started using debt. Pretty basic
debt from commercial banks.
Not very high leverage ratios. 3.5 times
EBITDA on a good day.
Um
generally lower
trailing EBITDA in the last 12 months.
Um that helped accelerate. Uh before we
couldn't use that because you you need
to be have an established track record
because before they take you seriously.
I would do the same if I were them.
Since then it's been essentially, you
know, debt and reinvested earnings and
that. So we have raised a bunch of
equity, but mostly to fuel secondary
transactions cuz if you're in business
for a long time, you start to getting to
a good scale, people are
are saying, "Okay, I've invested in this
company." And I'm talking really just
team members cuz from the beginning we
enabled people we pay just cash.
No variable pay of any kind.
And people can choose though to receive
some of their cash pay in equity at a
discount.
It's very unusual by the way.
And so in time people have accumulated
positions and that equity is worth
nothing if there's never any liquidity.
So we started organizing
secondary transaction every 18 months,
1 year, 2 years. We've had maybe five,
four or five, four probably since 2019.
And so mostly equity has been
raised to finance those transactions,
but occasionally the first capital
increase of any significance was in 2022
I think.
Uh so yes, we have dilution from capital
increases very modest. Off the top of my
head I'd say maybe 10%.
Uh
we could also not have done any of those
at all. We still did them because we
figured
in a couple of cases it helped us get
over the hump to close a deal we
couldn't without that a little extra.
With that [clears throat] we were maxed
out. But also we figured if we bring in
a little bit more in terms of high
quality
international investors,
that'll be helpful for credibility,
firepower if we need to go after a huge
acquisition quickly,
just optionality. But we're generally
very cautious in when it comes to
dilution. I think if you really believe
in what you're doing, you should be
should be painful to to to increase your
capital base. I don't know if it was
Evernote or some other one. We talked
about Evernote, so maybe pick a
different one. I'm curious for another
acquisition, whether it's WeTransfer or
Camood or or anything else. What's the
What's the AI photo sharing one? Remini,
which I was just looking at out out
before we started this morning. Are
there other acquisitions that have
taught you personally the most about
your own process, about doing this well,
that stand out in memory? There was one
time where let's say we bought
a product at the peak of let's call it a
viral moment. This is really not
applicable to the type of businesses we
buy today, but at the time it was a
thing.
It's many years ago now. Um
and uh
and then as soon as we bought it, they
basically that viral wave was reaching
and had reached the peak and and that
completely changed. We thought we'd been
conservative, but it completely changed
our assumptions and led to
drastically inferior returns
versus what we expected. And that taught
us to be absolutely
paranoid when it comes to the sources of
user acquisition. So basically either we
buy a businesses where
almost all the value lies in existing
customers or users like people, okay,
these have been acquired. It's just
about now
or if a lot of the value uh is
predicated on substantial additional
user acquisition or customer
acquisition, then
we need to really clearly understand the
drivers of that expected acquisition and
make sure that they these drivers are
things we can predict. For example, we
can make pretty accurate predictions of
of word of mouth rate under normal
circumstances, but not under sudden
viral moments. We don't feel very
confident making predictions of
future rates of user acquisition through
paid advertising for example. So that
was a big lesson learned.
Another one that we learned, we actually
went after Grinder,
the LGBTQ+ dating app in 2019. So the
app was owned by Chinese firm and CFIUS
was forcing it to sell. It was a big
bite for us at the time. We're much
smaller.
It would have quadrupled the company.
We didn't have
an equally substantial track record as
we do today.
So, we we we we went above and beyond to
raise the capital.
Almost won the deal.
Ultimately, we lost it because someone
else offered a bit more and we would
have offered more still, but we just had
capped out on available sources of
funds. So, that was a failure. We we
worked like it took up took us about 9
months of I was my main thing and the
main thing for several colleagues.
At the time we were also very
very small. We had an M&A team of one
person. So, it it really paused our
growth.
Had we bought it, it would have been an
incredible acceleration afterward, but
it [snorts] taught us to be very careful
to put all our eggs in one basket. And
so, in hindsight, I think we could have
still tried to get it, but maybe not
obsess so much over it considering how
unlikely it was to make it happen and
try to
place another few bets so that that
year, if you look at our growth,
those couple of years, it's way slower
than
almost any other year and that's the the
key reason. Like we put all we had into
making that one thing happen. It didn't
happen. We hadn't done anything else.
Well, I'd done some things, but nothing
that would really move the needle. So,
I'd say we've gotten almost obsessive
about seeing the world in terms of
statistics and
with that model of the world, act
accordingly.
>> Can you talk about AOL a little bit?
Obviously, that's a name that literally
everyone will have heard of and I'm
fascinated to hear the story of you
acquiring the business. So, people know
AOL as the way to connect to the
internet back in the day in the '90s,
even the '80s, I think actually. I think
they started very you know, pioneers.
At some point AOL was what Google was in
the 20 in the in the 2000s, you know,
like it was the the hot new thing. So,
they had this
I guess based I mean, outside it it
seems like a failed merger, you know, at
the Time Warner and whatnot. And then
they had different homes. It's actually
a very good business. It lost all the
customers that it had to lose over the
decades. And today it's a it's an email
inbox and a web portal with the
aggregator of news and and other
content. It's a very good business with
tens of millions of active users, very
loyal users. Again, there's a lot of
selection bias.
Uh people who want a Gmail have had
decades to to go through. Like you know,
people who really love that particular
experience, they have lots of stuff
there. Although the team has done a
pretty good job, I think, at managing
this business, there there's a you know,
a next level to be unlocked in terms of
polishing the product,
optimizing the offering, uh optimizing
monetization. It's just a very good
business that I think superficially
people think, "Oh, it's probably legacy
old. It's probably worth nothing." But
actually, it's it's wonderful business.
And in fact, again, I won't name names,
but a lot of
other companies in the broader messaging
or email the
uh
industry or segment and that if you just
read the news, you would think are
doing super well and they're much
larger, but actually if you had access
to
uh the user count,
P&L, including in time looking at
trends, they are just not nearly as
good. Like it doesn't even begin to
compare. AOL is actually I believe the
top five the fifth most used email inbox
in the Western world.
>> Crazy.
>> Which is, you know,
it's something. I mean, it's a pretty
competitive category. Is it Gmail? No.
If Google ever wants to divest it, I
will be happy to take a look.
But
um it's a very it's a very good business
that will be even better, I
I hope, that's the intent, as we pour
our hearts and souls into improving
every facet of it. One of my mentors, um
who's done a lot of investing and
building of of software businesses over
a long period of time, said that one of
the ways that he made the most money or
was the most successful would be that he
would enter in product situations where
there were 12 things going on and there
should only be three. That there was
always just like too much stuff, too
many features, too many products in the
company. Have you found that to be true
at all that there's
especially with companies that are a bit
older, that there's been this creep of
stuff that gets added that's not
necessary. Is that like a common element
of your playbook to take 12 down to
three? I don't know if it's necessarily
common
because not all companies do that, but
we have seen it. I guess why I tried I
thought it was a contrarian view, but
now that I know your friend thinks the
same, maybe not as contrarian as I
thought it was. But yes, I think people
in general
overestimate the value of R&D.
Let me qualify.
They think that generally pouring money
into building stuff pays pays off.
Uh-huh. It's really not true at all.
What we find is that there's a very
small number of things that pay pay off
handsomely and most things are waste of
money.
And while there's an element of you
don't know before you do it, so for sure
a lot of it you do. Um
for example, if you start from what your
customers need, really focus on that,
rather than maybe what your engineers
think think is cool or fancy visions
that have very little to do with the
core problems we're solving, you're
probably actually already
taking big strides in the in a direction
of greater efficiency. So, and by the
way, it's not just about keeping costs
more under control, but it's also doing
the the thing that matters better.
Evernote today
has a lower cost base than before,
but I promise you if you if you take 10
users at random,
power customers, power users, nine will
tell you that it's actually higher
performance, more resilient, a better
feature set.
And part of it is we've really focused
on what these customers needed, you
know, painfully needed. Um that helps
you do more with less essentially.
>> How do you think about um
taking capital from a fund that's a
10-year VC fund or something or private
equity fund versus a Berkshire Hathaway
that's, you know, got capital that lasts
forever. When you're when you're
thinking about the right partners? All
else equal, we do prefer a permanent
capital and
it's not so much because you even
permanent capital could ask you to to
liquidate. It's just that they don't
have to. And I think the fact that they
don't have to
reduces the probability that you'll find
yourself in a situation where
it's it's just an unnatural complicated
moment to do it, but you still have to
do it.
Uh incentives can become a little bit
perverse. Uh we haven't experienced that
before, but I know stories of others
having done that. If if, you know,
there's an evergreen source of capital,
I think
you're less likely to find yourself in
that unpleasant situation. However, I
will add I side more with investors on
this than entrepreneurs, although in a
way I'm
more of an entrepreneur, yeah. Uh
certainly. Um
I think a lot of entrepreneurs take take
money from investors
and have a level of
entitlement that they should never be
asked
to provide a return. It's like, "Oh, but
why do you ask me to sell now? It's only
been 4 years, 5 years."
I think that's either naive or
intellectually dishonest. Regardless of
the particular bylaws that investors
subjected to where maybe they could stay
forever, ultimately
an investor is trying to achieve
some form of IRR
with some time frame. So,
you should remain very respectful of the
fact that when you take anybody's money,
if you ask me, but certainly
institutional money, you can't find it
shocking or
disappointing or then about it in
the entrepreneur circles that they're
asking putting some level pressure with
you to to sell.
>> You're in such an interesting seat
because you're you're both investor and
operator and so you have the shared
perspective that you you're often buying
things as an investor, but then running
them as an operator. If you think across
all the investors, pure investors that
have come and studied Bending Spoons,
some of them had have made equity
investments, secondary investments, etc.
What distinguishes the best
investors that what what do they do
that's most different from those that
are, let's say, average? I'd say most
good investors
are
they recognize patterns. So, I've seen a
certain business model work
and they use that to select their
investments. If done right, this is a
very successful way of investing.
And then there are the bad investors and
the amazing investors. None of which is
a pattern recognizer.
So, they actually assess each business
in an ad hoc manner
on its own deep fundamental merit,
but that's much more difficult. And that
what that's what divides the truly
outlier investors from the bad ones.
Those in the middle, maybe even leaning
toward good, are pattern recognizers.
But then the truly incredible ones, you
sit with them
and they're not saying, "Oh, you are,
you know, the Uber of bicycles."
>> You're the Berkshire for this. They they
understand the almost the laws of
physics to make a metaphor that makes so
that the apple falls.
>> Yeah. And that gives them
certainly a lot of confidence, but also
the ability
to see what others don't because
ultimately a lot of the time,
a good investment is not
a determining that something is good.
Like a lot of companies, most of us
could tell they're good. But if
everybody or even quite a lot of people
think they're good, probably the price
embeds that goodness and it's not a
great deal. It is what it is. It's like
a lot of companies today in AI. Again,
I'm not going to name names, but some
probably deserve the
valuation. Some will history will prove
were even cheap. But but most, even the
good ones, are probably too expensive
simply because everybody wants to
invest. In a way, it's the same thing.
The truly outstanding investors will be
able to find something that's really
good, but few people think is good. And
the only way to do that is not to apply
pattern because by definition, if it
were if it fit a pattern, then everybody
it's either bad by the pattern or good
by the pattern, everybody is on board.
It has to not fit the pattern and you
have to find ways of determining it's
good. That's very difficult
intellectually. It needs creativity,
imagination, lots of logic, rationality.
It cognitively is next level. In that
specific effort for Bending Spoons
specifically,
where have the best investors really dug
in to get that that physics
understanding of your business that's
different than how other things work?
Like where do the best dig in? I think
some of the best are are really good at
understanding people,
at discerning
who's really smart and not promotional
from those who are not so smart, but
very good promoters. And so, when you
see a business as a strong track record
and someone explains to you in a way
that makes sense, it's not just a good
story but it makes logical sense, that's
huge indication that probably there's
something there.
First of all, you now know why things
have worked out and you can determine
whether they're likely to continue
working out. And secondly, if you're
investing in someone who's made good
decisions for the right reasons, not
just out of luck,
they're just more likely to navigate the
future variables that will be thrown at
them better than most.
I know investors who invested, for
example, in Amazon early days, who told
me one particularly, who told me that
the main reason why why he did and he
made a big bet on it and it was a huge
success.
It was not because he believed he did
believe, you know, in the e-commerce
model and all that, but he believed that
nobody, very few people he'd ever met
had the clarity of thought, the
rationality of Jeff Bezos. And so a
model he believed could, you know, had
legs
coupled with a person he thought was a
brilliant leader, a very bright problem
solver, that
alone set that opportunity apart from a
lot of other stuff. Yes, it would be
difficult to have wide margins for a
long time, but he was confident that the
company would be much better than at
least it would it was priced at at the
time. So so I think understanding people
and their cognitive abilities is quite
difficult. It requires in and of itself
great cognitive abilities. I find that
if someone is eight out of 10 smart,
they can only discern
the sevens from the sixes from the
fives, but the eight and the halves, the
nines, the 10s for them look like the
same, like a big batch of oh, they're so
smart.
And so for to be able to distinguish the
10s from the nines and the eights, you
need to be probably close to a 10
yourself. And of of course experience
and other elements too, which make it
very difficult. They're not just
brilliant from a point of view of logic
logic and analysis, but also
rationality. Trying to really ignore
this person is really pleasant or
charismatic. Yes,
park it. What's really beneath that?
It's difficult. I mean, we we as humans
have been
evolution has made us animals of of of
gut, of emotion, but emotion investing,
they're not good friends, I think, or at
least good investing. Another thing that
you have to deal with in a unique way is
this cocktail of incentives and
motivation for different parts of the
business. You have business units where
a team is running an Evernote, for
example, that's different than a spooner
that's in the home office that's being
moved around and doing lots of different
things. What have you learned about
setting incentives for people to get the
outcomes that you want in a in a fairly
complex structure? I don't know if this
will disappoint you,
but we don't.
Everybody
is paid a fixed salary,
no variable pay, no stock grants,
nothing.
They can choose to invest part of their
cash pay at a discount, not a crazy but
a pretty generous discount at the top
core level, and that's it. The way we
maximize alignment of of effort is by
hiring people we believe are are high
integrity, that have great professional
pride,
and then just treating them with the
utmost respect. And I think most people
will try to do what's right and do
what's right for the business along the
the lines of the mandate to give you
gave them. So if you say ultimately
you're optimizing for Meningitis Spoons,
not Evernote,
nine out of 10 people, if you're hired
well and the culture is right, will take
it to heart and do that. In fact, I
believe sometimes setting financial
incentives, of course if people do well,
they they're likely to get more
responsibility, higher salaries, not
that it's
certainly there's that, but it's not as
immediately tied to a
it
results next quarter or something very
measurable. It's through observation in
time, if you're great at your job, you
you probably get more, do more. But I
I think that sometimes when you set
typical incentive plans with KPIs and
whatnot, first of all, it's very costly.
Takes a lot of time. So for that to be
ROI positive, it's not enough that it
adds value, it needs to add more value
than the cost that's implied.
It's absolutely guaranteed to create at
least some perverse incentives, cuz
nobody can set perfect incentives. The
world is too complicated, it changes too
fast,
for sure. So even if you're a genius,
uh whatever you set as incentives will
be imperfect. So there is an additional
inefficiency that whatever extra
efficiency needs to overcome before it's
you're even into
uh black territory as opposed to red
territory. I think also those kind of
incentives tend to hinder
relationships.
They tend to make things more
transactional. It's more difficult to
have a proper problem-solving session
where all we're thinking about is how do
we win together? I think most people
will have it in the back of their minds
like, okay, how do I get the better
bonus? Like it's difficult to be
entirely resistant to that feeling. And
so I'm sure it could be done better, but
we chose the simple way, which is we
just try to hire well, treat people
respectfully, and just get rid of all
that stuff and assume you'll do the best
you can. I'm sure you're always
dissatisfied with the state of things
and want things to get better all the
time. What about Meningitis Spoons today
are you most dissatisfied with?
Yeah, I'm that kind of person, by the
way. I'm perennially unhappy, which I
think sounds awful, cuz in a way I feel
guilt I I feel very fortunate. It's just
I feel very fortunate and I'm and I'm
perennially unhappy, which is a a huge
superpower and a curse at the same time.
You could imagine. I mean, I'm I'm not
alone I mean, many people in this world
are like that. What is not good or at
least not as good as it could be? Well,
one of the things that
is critical for our growth is hiring and
coaching.
I am I'm absolutely positive we offer
literally, you know, one-of-a-kind level
jobs, some of the best on the planet.
I'm absolutely certain.
Incredible talent density, you learn
faster than anyone anywhere else. You
get an opportunity to take on
responsibility that's crazy. Most of our
general managers who run businesses on
average
50 to 100 million in revenue. So
if they were a scale-up, they would be
considered a large scale-up. Many of
these people are like 27, 28. Most of
them are I think very few are above 30.
So unique opportunities, excellent
financial opportunities too, whether
it's
very good salaries and investment
opportunity in a company that's growing
fast. We feel very privileged of getting
a ton of great applications, like I
said, a huge number.
I think we should be getting more better
and should be better at identifying the
raw talent. I know we're rejecting a lot
of great applicants who are actually
better than some of the people we hire
because we're just not good enough at
spotting that talent in someone who has
a such a short track record, maybe a
student, new graduate. That's an area of
massive frustration in a way. I'm at the
same time very proud of what the team
has done there and frustrated we we
can't yet do better. And I know that's
one of the the keys to
growing fast and and achieving what we
set out to achieve. Um so that's
certainly a a major area. I'm always
frustrated with I think our our society
is there's too much regulation. We're
really working on the wrong stuff as at
the institutional level.
People try to create economic growth and
prosperity through more rules. Just
telling you, yeah, if you if we tell
them exactly where to go with lots of
rules,
surely we'll be prosperous. They don't
understand that it's quite the opposite.
You get you got to get out of the way
and create as free and open a playground
as you can.
We keep adding rules. Elon Musk once
said something that I thought was
brilliant and I fully subscribe to it.
He said, we should have a rule that
every new law is automatically removed,
say 3 years later, unless someone can
make a really good case that's created a
lot of value. So we wouldn't have
10,000-page long civil codes or
whatever. Like to to be we're basically
trying to prevent rare corner cases,
unpleasant, sometimes tragic corner
cases, while making 99.99%
of the normal cases less efficient, more
more painful, some utterly impossible.
Uh but because they're not as
newsworthy, because they're typically
widespread and and normal, those
inefficiencies are not as interesting to
talk about.
In aggregate, they are just a massive
tragedy, a much bigger tragedy than the
one individual tragedy of one corner
case. Ultimately, when it comes to
regulation, the corner case wins and we
regulate it that way, but we make life
much worse for everybody else 99% of the
time. The so this frustrates me because
I think we're just shooting ourselves in
the foot as a society, essentially.
What's your balance of time of like what
I'll call maintenance hours of
internal stuff, you know, keeping the
trains running, versus space that you
create to tinker with the business, try
new things, stretch that comfort zone
that you were talking about earlier? I
guess the bigger the question behind the
question is like, what does your week
look like? Like how do how do you spend
your time? Well, it varies by by period
a lot. So for example, if we are
when we close a a large transaction, I'm
all open there with with a task force,
in the in the trenches, meeting the new
team and for for weeks or even months
sometimes, that would take up 50% of my
time. If we're working on a big
fundraise, we just raised the largest
uh
that round of any private company in
Italy in history. And like we said, we
we we raised $700 million at an $11
billion valuation.
Um
in equity,
these two initiatives certainly took a
substantial part of my time.
And when we're not in fundraising mode,
that goes down to a trickle. Maybe I
have [snorts] some calls with investors,
but much less.
Uh so it varies, but I would say
probably
a fair split would be
50% of my time talent.
I check each candidate before we extend
an offer. I extend the offer. I talk to
many of the new hires.
Uh I help with talent density. I help
trying to push for being demanding. So
that's probably 50% of my time.
50% of my time is on average
probably financing and external
relations, I would say.
50% of my time is
these transformations of companies we
newly acquire. And and 50% of my time
would be other, call it, long-tail
platform work, which is probably where I
would put
that thinking creatively about how to
improve the strategy and that work all
the time. So I probably work as two
FTEs, like I think most people in my
position would.
But it's probably these four categories
are comparable in in investment. What
did you learn during this biggest ever
debt raise? Most of the people that I
talked to for this are raising equity
capital. I I haven't had a lot of
conversations with people that have
raised lots of debt capital for
something like an acquisition. So I'm
I'm curious about the whole process and
how you would compare and contrast
equity versus debt capital markets from
a raising perspective. Yeah, the mindset
is quite different cuz an equity
investor tolerates the risk of losing
money vastly better
because they have an upside that's
essentially uncapped within reason.
A lender
is almost entirely intolerant to the
possibility of losing cuz their upside
is
that 3% spread, 5% spread. You you know,
depending on depending on the exact
financial instrument, it's still a
limited and generally fixed
upside they have. So they it's all about
not losing it. So a lot of the questions
are more oriented toward understanding
the potential worst-case scenario and
the risks. Equity investors are more
oriented toward the TAM.
How big could this be? How quickly could
we get there? The surprising part is a
lot of banks, a lot of lenders are
actually quite visionary. I hear people
say, "Well, they're probably more boring
cuz they're Actually, no. A lot of them
are brilliant and
and visionary. So they're quite curious
about the model and where it could uh
how far it could go and and understand
very quickly why it works. Uh
So I I thoroughly enjoyed my
conversations with lenders at least as
much as those with the with equity
investors. Uh perhaps because they have
these They have to be so paranoid about
the downside, this breeds in them a
thoroughness, a thoughtfulness that's
not always the case with equity
investors for whom maybe that intuition
of all this team, this thing could go
far is more important like catching the
big wins is more important that And so
they can be wrong more often. So they're
maybe a little bit more
They're a bit quicker in their judgment
a bit a bit more. But but I think
lenders are quite an interesting type of
of investor to to talk to. And generally
it works that you talk to a couple of
anchor lenders,
some of the biggest banks, uh typically
those with a strong investment banking
arm, too.
They help you
figure out that kind of shape the round.
They They commit some of the money
immediately, so you know you've got some
of it covered and you know where you're
going. And then you start bringing under
the tent more players with other
important roles and then lesser roles
and at some point it's
just providing capital. And typically,
some of these capital is
basically it's with that lender it will
be a perm it will stay with you until
maturity, 5 or 7 years down the line.
Some some of this capital you may want
to syndicate, so you the lender tells
you, "Okay, I'll give you a billion
dollars,
but we agree that in the short term
we'll be going out to sell away
essentially this billion dollar to many
providers each with 1, 10, 50 bill
million each. And they'll hold it for
for 5 years or 7 years, but I'm just
giving you a bridge to that moment. You
need the money now, you're doing M&A for
example, and we don't have time to talk
to 20 parties. Plus, it would certainly
leak that you're buying that target. So
I help you get there, but then we agree
contractually that we'll be uh
transferring that credit from me to
these other these other lenders. So that
that phase is also interesting and uh
it's quite optimized cuz the debt
markets are huge. It's gigantic and
vastly more
efficient probably than the actually
much smaller, say VC capital markets.
And so
the the process of how you take that
credit from the point of view of a
lender and and syndicate it out is super
standardized by now. You
create a deck, you record a
presentation, it's
distributed to Yeah, yeah, yeah. You
show up for 1 hour maybe three times
with batches of lenders. Like it's super
super standardized. Very efficient. I'm
so curious what you think about um what
I would call almost like a religious
debate right now in the world of
software, which is how AI will affect
the sorts of businesses that you've
bought historically. Will it enhance
them? Will it hurt them because it's
easier to create replicas or copies or
new versions? Um we talked about Remini
earlier, which is a an app that you
bought before ChatGPT or that I'm sure
has benefited tremendously from from the
advent of AI.
How does this new tidal wave of
technology impact your old businesses?
How you think about new businesses? Just
your take on it in general.
>> Yeah, it's a complex discussion and I
think you're asking maybe a time frame
of 5 years cuz AI changes the the very
fabric of our society
50 years out or something like a long
time frame. Uh
in ways that are both exciting and
scary.
But in the medium term, I think for
Benevolent specifically, I think it's
mostly a good thing cuz we don't care
too much about the risk to each
individual piece of our business.
Basically, most of our business units
are 20% of our revenue or less. So even
a
a dramatic decrease in one of them is
still in the grand scheme of things kind
of minor. Percentage wise.
>> been growing at 75% a year, you know,
like I'd rather
none of them decline, but some do, some
will. Maybe one or two will decline
fast. It's undesirable, but not
existential. So for our model, it's
highly diversified. A lot of what we do
is being
better functionally better at running
this company, meaning having a higher
quality output at a lower cost across
the functions, engineering, design,
product, growth.
AI is a an accelerator of both quality
and efficiency if used properly,
but it doesn't do it by itself. Maybe it
will in 10 years, but today we we We've
seen it clearly as we have invested
internally in excellence through AI in
our operations. A lot of it is custom
integrations,
proprietary technology, a lot of
cultural work on getting people to use
it the right way. So like with every
innovation in the past, we'll see a
small percentage of companies being at
the forefront of leveraging that. Most
companies being being laggards. And I'm
pretty confident Benevolent will be at
the very cutting edge of using it. And
we're already
making strides there.
That if anything will the gap in in
ability
uh between us and most companies uh will
even will widen for for years. But
again, I think it's likely to mostly
benefit uh an aggregator and
consolidator like Benevolent assuming we
stay disciplined with pricing
uh while being very disruptive for for
certain uh verticals. And some will be
disrupted much earlier. So I think we as
a society and investment community will
be able to start seeing
things and and update our model of
reality and and predictions based on
that. Can it be disruptive for many SaaS
businesses? Absolutely. I think the time
where we open up ChatGPT and we tell it,
"Okay, build me Jira." Yeah.
>> Or is far away. Yeah. Is far away. Like
it's not months away, it's not even a
couple of years away. AI today can do a
lot for you
beyond, say, research, copywriting, and
maybe some basic content production. But
it'll do more and more and fast.
Like I said before, we we were working
with AI in 2010, so we're very early.
I'm a big believer in AI, very big.
However,
even if it could build Jira today, it's
not that easy to explain to it what you
want when it's so complex.
So I wouldn't underestimate the
inability of the of the user to get out
of it what they need. These products
been honed to customer needs for a long
time.
Uh you're already using them. There is,
you know, an investment in them in terms
of data.
So not only does the tool need to get to
a point where it can replicate that and
with the same guarantee of performance,
very difficult. Like getting to
something that works the same 95% of the
time, still like we're super far from
it. But that's an infinitely
easier challenge than something that
works essentially 100% of the time,
infinitely easier.
But also you need to be able to guide it
to build it the way you want. And as
long as software is ultimately a
relatively small share of wallet, like
if you think about it, it's not an
expense people will optimize first. It's
not like a car that literally you plan
your finances finances around.
Before that truly eats into the overall
size of the market, I think we're
talking a lot of stars need to align. I
think it's probably
many years out. You mentioned earlier
that ultimately your main product is
your company and the people that work
here are the key people to attract. The
jobs are products themselves. What are
some of your favorite ways of making
sure once you get these amazing people,
we talked a lot about data science and
recruiting and the pipeline and the
crazy number of applicants and so on.
Once they're here, making sure that they
get the most out of it and you get the
most out of them, which is a you know,
mutually beneficial. What are the sorts
of traditions and things that you do
that you think have most contributed to
being the kind of place you want to
work?
>> Ultimately, the most important thing is
to be very clear on what kind of company
you want to be, your principles, your
values, and then hire people who
uh embrace those. And and then you
yourself
as a person who's maybe more visible
than others, try as hard as you can to
be the best paragon of those values as
you can be cuz that that's most more
important than any, you know, manifesto
or
initiative or big
proclamation. There are certainly things
you can do that help uh on the margins
help foster those values a little bit
further. A few things we do that are I
think are unusual and we we love are One
is it called State of the Spoon. It's
twice a year
we have
somewhat the equivalent of an Apple
keynote, but it's just internal. And
most of our teams
take turns on stage presenting their
most proud achievement oh and also
failures and lessons learned of the past
6 months, what they're planning for the
future.
And it's always um there's an element of
comedy and self-deprecation,
uh which makes it I think quite
entertaining. You laugh a lot. I always
It's like 3 or 4 hours and at the end of
it I have like my my jaw is painful cuz
I laughed too much. It's just fun.
Uh
we organize all sorts of kind of almost
cabaret things and uh it's a great
tradition and it just helps us
you know, be proud of the things you do
well,
remember not to take ourselves too
seriously, we're not saving lives. Uh
you you meet and
learn about colleagues you
maybe hadn't necessarily been close to
before.
Another one we do is a yearly retreat
where we bring everybody
to a remote exciting typically exotic
destination for 7 8 9 days on the
company's time and dime.
It's just a vacation with your
colleagues. The last one
in which order but we went to
Seychelles, Mauritius, the Dominican
Republic in the past we went to Japan,
Australia. We think it helps establish a
level of trust bonds with colleagues and
ultimately a company is people. So if
you're if you bond with colleagues
you're bonding with the abstract concept
of the of the company to an extent.
It's not the same thing. It's not enough
but it's part of it.
We believe that it pays dividends in
terms of again uh
willingness to sacrifice to be honest
about problems to do your best.
>> Why do you think there are not more
Bending Spoons? I mean it's kind of like
asking why are there not more
Berkshire's like there's only one
Buffett. Um
but why why do you think there haven't
been more people that have taken
advantage of this ecosystem this huge
TAM of companies that are more mature
now that are you can acquire that have
installed user bases in low growth lower
growth. There's always a first.
Private equity wasn't a thing until it
was a thing until today you have
trillions of dollars in private equity.
So someone
try you could have done private equity
before KKR did private equity. Nothing
prevented you from doing private equity
in the 1930s.
But I to my knowledge nobody was doing
private equity. So at some point someone
come up comes up with an idea. It makes
sense. It's efficient. It works. Others
flock to compete. Sometimes that ruins
the opportunity.
Regardless you have a market. This may
be the case. We'll see. I think we have
a far superior competitive advantage
advantages than a private equity because
essentially a private equity
every single every acquisition is is
almost a we start a fresh in a way.
In our case we do well because of the
platform and the structure and so
you would you would take many years for
someone to build the employer brand, the
talent pool, the culture, the
technologies to get to really compete.
So I'm actually not at all this which is
also one of the reasons why you see me
being pretty transparent about some of
the principles cuz I I think I thought
about it and I figured if if I started
over
knowing all I do which I knew someone
else typically wouldn't at all also
because what I say here it's the tip of
the iceberg but then from there to
actual day-to-day make it work but
but even if I if if I started over with
all I know and even if someone said oh I
trust you do super well here's a billion
dollars
to get to where we are now say 12 years
after the foundation of Bending Spoons
it would take me maybe not 12 years but
easily seven or eight. Like it's
a huge slog. You hire two people you
spend a year coaching them and then you
hire four and they coach them and you
help you.
And you build the technology slowly you
know it takes time to write software and
polish it. So presumably more will try.
I would say that's to be expected and
it's being painful.
Again private equity is very difficult
but if you're bright you understand
business
finding someone who will give you you
know not a hundred billion dollars.
That's the best of the best over a
decade but enough that's that you can
have a business and it's worth trying is
not that difficult. There are so many
private equity firms. Ultimately you
just need to do well enough that you
don't look bad like you're around
average and many will die but some even
statistically will do well enough. So
it's easy the barriers to entry are low.
And so you have a proliferation out of
proliferation of wannabes. Some will
prove to be great. Some will be great
out of luck and so again you have more
competition. But
trying to build a Bending Spoons is
if you understand what you're doing
which is a prerequisite prerequisite to
even have a chance
it's dauntingly painful. I mean again
many years from the ground up
cultivating the little garden. There is
no shortcut to it. So I think it's just
not a model that when people see it a
lot of people have known about it for
years as I've talked to investors and
I've seen nobody try cuz they just
understand it's just too painful.
>> I have loved doing this with you. It's
so fun to hear you be so transparent
about what you've done to build this
thing. It's such a unique business and a
unique place. It's fun to do it here
with you here in Milan. When I do these
interviews I ask everyone the same
traditional closing question. What is
the kindest thing that anyone's ever
done for you? So when I was a little kid
I I was
almost pathologically shy to the point
that I was uh
let's say diagnosed with autism. I think
the diagnosis was not necessarily
strictly scientific but that's to say I
was so introverted and shy. I spent
years in uh
elementary school talking to nobody
pretty much. So I go to middle school in
Italy where middle school between the
age of 10 and 13 I think. And it's
the first year school year goes by and I
have talked to essentially nobody in my
class. Literally.
And we're late in the year I think it's
probably May
and
we're we're on a school trip
in the hills just taking a stroll with
our teacher and probably seeing some
ruins or some Roman thing. It's a pretty
common thing to do in Italy. Plenty of
ruins. Um
and all of a sudden two classmates of
mine come over they just hug me and and
they just start talking and they were
the two
outgoing popular guys in the class. They
just talked to me and they on the bus
they just dragged me with them in the in
in the back and we start singing and I'm
terrified and happy at the same time cuz
I did want to
socialize. I just
I didn't know how. And they keep
investing in this relationship for a
long time. And again we're 10 or 11 so
little kids
until
months later I felt confident in myself
and I had turned into a reasonably
social person. Like I could not the most
social not the most outgoing but you
wouldn't tell that I had been almost
pathologically shy to the point that my
mom brought me to a doctor you know like
and I owe it to those two two guys. And
what I learned during the third third
and last year of of of middle school was
that so one of them got mad at me for
something stupid like a girl I don't
know kissed
me not him [snorts] like again stupid
thing 12 years old and it lasted five
minutes. But in those five minutes he
was furious and he told me you remember
two years ago when
Alberto and I
did this and that and helped you and
involved you and got you out of your
shell. Well we didn't do it because we
thought you were cool but because this
teacher
told us that you needed help.
And he did it to hurt me to say that.
But actually I'd never felt more
grateful in my life cuz it's very
difficult if you think about it for
someone 10 years old
to actually implement that request from
a teacher
to go with the with the uncool guy
go go through the slog of months where
the guy barely talks inviting him
after classes to go to his place to play
video games or play football and
and they literally changed my life. It's
probably the single thing that ever
happened to me that I'm most grateful
for. Incredible closing story. I
absolutely love it. Thank you so much
for your time. Thank you Patrick. My
pleasure.